18.05.2026
Lennart Blumenthal

# 2-SAT

A 2-SAT formula is a boolean formula in CNF form, whith at most 2 variables per clause. For example:

$(a \lor b) \land (\overline{a} \lor c) \land (\overline{b} \lor \overline{c})$

The 2-SAT problem now asks the question whether there exists an assignement to the variables $p: V \longrightarrow \{0 (false),1 (true)\}$, such that the formula evaluates to 1 (true).


One can notice that any 2-SAT formula can be written as the conjunction of implications. For example:
$$(a \lor b) \land (\overline{a} \lor c) \land (\overline{b} \lor \overline{c}) \Leftrightarrow (\overline{a} \rightarrow b) \land (a \rightarrow c) \land (b \rightarrow \overline{c})$$

We will use this form for the following algorithm.


## Algorithm

The standard 2-SAT algorithm, reduces 2-SAT to the problem of calculating strongly connected components (SCC) of a directed graph. 

For each variable $a$ in the formula we add two vertices $a$ and $\overline{a}$ to the graph. For a implication $a \rightarrow b$ we will put a directed edge, from $a$ to $b$ and another directed edge from $\overline{b}$ to $\overline{a}$. Notice that as this is quite natural as $a\rightarrow b \Leftrightarrow \overline{a} \rightarrow \overline{b}$.
After constructing the graph, we run an SCC algorithm, like Tarjan, running in linear time $O(n + m)$. 

If we then find some $a$ and $\overline{a}$ in the same SCC, we conclude that no satisfying assignement exists. 
This is easy to see, as any path in the constructed graph corresponds to an implication chain. By definition of $a$ and $\overline{a}$ being in the same SCC, we know that there exists adirected paths from $a$ to $\overline{a}$ and one from $\overline{a}$ to $a$. Thus (using transitivity of the logical implication '$\rightarrow$') our original formula implied that $a \rightarrow \overline{a}$ and $\overline{a} \rightarrow a$. It is easy to see that no matter whether we choose $a$ to be true or false, one of these two implications is not satisfied. Therefore one can conclude that no solution to our 2-SAT instance exists.  

Otherwise, we can reconstruct an assignement by traversing the dag of SCCs. We start out by explaining an algorithm where correctness is easy to see and later present a analogous algorithm which is easier to implement.

Note that by way of construction, we always have $\operatorname{deg_{out}}(a) = \operatorname{deg_{in}}(\overline{a})$ and furthmermore the in- and out-neighbourhoods of the two vertices, contain the same variables, only that they are negated in one and positive in the other. As our SCCs create a dag, we know there exists some minimal SCC $S$. For every element $a \in S$ it holds that all outgoing edges, are to vertices of $S$. By the previous observation, we find a SCC $\overline{S}$ which contains exactly the negated literals of $S$. Furthermore $\overline{S}$ is maximal. We also know that $S \cap \overline{S} = \emptyset$, as otherwise we where in the unsatisfiable case. We can now simply assign all literals in $S$ to false, which corresponds to setting all literals in $\overline{S}$ to true.
Afterwords delete $S$ and $\overline{S}$ and continue finding an assignement for the rest. It is easy to verify that each implication edge remains satisfied under this assignement by considering edges going from $S$ to $S$, edges from the remaining graph to $S$, edges from $\overline{S}$ to $\overline{S}$ and edges from $\overline{S}$ to the remaining graph, and checking that each is satisfied independent of the assignement of the remainnig graph. 

Instead of the previously described algorithm there is a much simpler way of implementing the reconstruction. Simpy find a topological order of the SCCs (denoting the index of the SCC containing a as $\operatorname{index}[a]$) and color give each variable $a$ the truth value of $\operatorname{index}[a] < \operatorname{index}[\overline{a}]$. Note that the SCC code usually already returns SCCs in a topological ordering, therefore the resulting code is very short:

```c++
// indices correspond to the variables: var = {a,¬a,b,¬b,...}
bool solve() {
    SCC scc(adj); // call to scc code
    sol.assign(n, -1);
    for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
        if (scc.idx[i] == scc.idx[1^i]) return false;
        sol[i] = scc.idx[i] < scc.idx[1^i];
    }
    return true;
}
```


## Practice Problems:
- https://codeforces.com/contest/1438/problem/C
- https://codeforces.com/contest/1475/problem/F

