06.07.2026
Lucas Schwebler

# Generating Functions 1
We discuss several solutions to the following problem:
> Roll $r$ six-sided dice. What is the probability that their sum is $n$?

First of all, note that there is an easy DP in $O(nr)$.
However, we want faster solutions.

The main idea is that we want to encode the probability distribution (of the sum of $r$ independent d6) as the coefficients of a polynomial (or more generally, formal power series).
That is, we want to find $F = \sum_{k=0}^\infty a_k X^k$ such that $a_k$ is the probability that the sum is $k$.
The answer to the problem is then $a_n$ and we may also use the notation $a_n = [X^n] F$.

It turns out that $F = p^r$ where $p = \frac{1}{6}X + \frac{1}{6}X^2 + \frac{1}{6}X^3 + \frac{1}{6}X^4 + \frac{1}{6}X^5 + \frac{1}{6}X^6$.
Some intuition: Suppose that $r=2$ and now fully distribute the product $p \cdot p$. As a result we get $36$ terms. Each of them corresponds to one possible outcome of the dice roll. For example, $\frac{1}{6} X^2 \cdot \frac{1}{6} X^5 = \frac{1}{36} X^7$ corresponds to the outcome of first rolling a $2$ and then a $5$. This outcome contributes $\frac{1}{36}$ to the event of having a sum of $7$. It should be clear that by summing over all possible outcomes, we get the correct probability distribution.

Now that we are convinced of $F = p^r$, it remains to compute $[X^n] p^r$ efficiently.

## FFT
Using FFT (or NTT), it is possible to multiply two polynomials of degree $n$ in $O(n \log n)$.
Using square-and-multiply, we can thus compute $p^r$ in $O(r \log r)$. Note that we just have a single log factor since the square-and-multiply doubles the degree in each iteration.

## Magic
Can we do it without FFT (and even faster)? Yes!

To make things simpler, let $p = \frac{1}{6}X q$ and we only focus on computing $q^r$. 
$$
q^r = (\sum_{k=0}^5 X^k)^r = (\frac{1-X^6}{1-X})^r = (1-X^6)^r \cdot (1-X)^{-r}
$$
By the binomial theorem, we have
$$
(1-X^6)^r = \sum_{k=0}^r (-1)^k\binom{r}{k} X^{6k}
$$
and by its extension to rational numbers, we have
$$
(1-X)^{-r} = \sum_{k=0}^\infty \binom{-r}{k} (-1)^k X^k = \sum_{k=0}^\infty \binom{k+r-1}{k} X^k
$$

Thus, $[X^n] q^r$ can be obtained in $O(n)$ by looking at the pairs of coefficients whose exponents sum to $n$.

