13.07.2026
Lucas Schwebler

# Generating Functions 2 - EGFs and Combinatorial Species
- Last Time: Ordinary Generating Functions $\sum_{k=0}^\infty a_k x^k$ encode sequences as formal power series / polynomials.
- Algebraic manipulations can lead to more efficient formulas.
- Today: Exponential Generating Functions $\sum_{k=0}^\infty \frac{a_k}{k!} x^k$
- Why EGF? Rule of thumb: OGFs work for counting unlabeled objected, EGFs for labeled objects

Motivating example:
- Bell numbers $B_n$: number of partitions of $\{1, \ldots, n\}$
- EGF: $e^{e^x-1}$
- How is such formula useful? There are algorithms for computing the first $n$ terms in $O(n \log n)$! (based on FFT + Newton iteration, see TCR)
- Usual way of deriving the EGF: Get recursive formula for $B_n$, translate to formal power series and solve a differential equation.
- Can be done without any calculations: A partition is a `set` of `non-empty sets`. The EGF of `set` is $e^x$ and the EGF of `nonempty set` is $e^x-1$. Thus, the EGF of `partition` is $e^{e^x-1}$. More details later.

## What is a Combinatorial Species
- If you like Category Theory, read [adamant's blog](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/103979) ("a combinatorial species is a functor on the category of finite sets")
- We use an informal approach: A Species describes all ways how a certain combinatorial object can be constructed from a set of labels.

Examples of species:
- `set`: For $n$ labels, there is exactly one way to make a set out of them since order does not matter. Thus, the EGF is $\sum_{k=0}^\infty \frac{1}{k!} x^k = e^x$
- `permutaion`: For $n$ labels, there are $n!$ permutations on them. Thus, the EGF is $\sum_{k=0}^\infty \frac{k!}{k!} x^k = \frac{1}{1-x}$.

Many natural operations on species correspond to simple operations on their EGFs:
- Product: We have two species $A$ and $B$ and out of them, we make a new species $C$ such that objects of type $C$ are pairs of type $(A, B)$. For example, consider the product `set` $\times$ `permutation`. For three lables, some included objects are
    - $(\emptyset, \binom{1 \ 2 \ 3}{1 \ 2 \ 3})$, $(\emptyset, \binom{1 \ 2 \ 3}{2 \ 1 \ 3})$, ...
    - $(\{1\}, \binom{2 \ 3}{2 \ 3})$, $(\{1\}, \binom{2 \ 3}{3 \ 2})$
    - $(\{2\}, \binom{1 \ 3}{1 \ 3})$, $(\{2\}, \binom{1 \ 3}{3 \ 1})$
    - ...
    - $(\{1, 2, 3\}, \emptyset)$
- How to count the number of objects created this way? Suppose that the $A$ structure has size $k$ and the $B$ structure thus has size $n-k$. This corresponds to $\binom{n}{k} a_k b_{n-k}$ objects where the binomial coefficient appears because we need to decide which labels go to $A$ and which go to $B$. EGFs are built such that the product of the formal power series $A \cdot B$ gives us $C$.
- Now, we come to the really interesting operation: composition. Here, we have two species $A$ and $B$ and we make a new species $C$ whose objects are of type $A$, but have objects of type $B$ as labels. For example, let $A$ be the species `set` and $B$ be the species `non-empty set`. For $n = 3$, we can for example make the labels $\{1, 3\}$ and $\{2\}$ of type $B$ out of our original three labels and then we make the $A$ structure (aka set) $\{\{1, 3\}, \{2\}\}$ out of them.
- How to count the number of objects? Suppose that our $A$ structure has size $k$. Then, there are $a_k$ ways to form the $A$ structure and $[x^n]B^k$ ways to create a $k$-tuple of $B$ structures on $n$ labels (the case $n=2$ is the product which we just discussed). Then, we also need to divide by $k!$ since the order in this tuple should not matter. Thus, the EGF of the composition is $A(B(x)) = \sum_{k=0}^\infty \frac{a_k}{k!} B^k(x)$

## More examples:
- A permutation is a set of (oriented) cycles. Call the EGF for permutations $P$ and the one for cycles $C$. Thus, $P = e^C$ or rearranged $C = \ln(P)$ and we already know $P = \frac{1}{1-x}$
- Counting connected graphs: Let $G$ be the EGF for (undirected, labeled) graphs and $C$ be the EGF for connected graphs. A graph is just a set of connected graphs (i.e. connected components). Thus, $G = e^C$ and thus $C = \ln(G)$. What is $G$? On $n$ labeled vertices, there are $2^{\binom{n}{2}}$ graphs, so $G = \sum_{k=0}^\infty \frac{2^{\binom{k}{2}}}{k!} x^k$
- Recursive definitions: Counting labeled ordered rooted trees (that is, order of children matters): Let $T$ be the EGF which we want. We have
$$
T = x(1 + T + T^2 + T^3 + ...) = \frac{x}{1 - T}
$$
because an ordered tree is just a pair of a root node and a linear order of subtrees.
Solving this equation gives $T$. Instead of getting a closed form, we can also use Newton iteration similarly to how we compute $e^A$.

## Exercises:
- [Connected Graph](https://atcoder.jp/contests/fps-24/tasks/fps_24_m)
- Count labeled connected undirected graphs on $n$ vertices with $n$ edges 
- [Rooted Tree](https://atcoder.jp/contests/fps-24/tasks/fps_24_o) (needs Lagrange inversion)
- [Game](https://atcoder.jp/contests/fps-24/tasks/fps_24_s) (hard!, it might be necessary to understand Newton iterations / Lagrange inversion for this!)